JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
On the "NewsHour" tonight: After
16 years
of U.S. military presence and
sacrifice in
Afghanistan, and yesterday's
historic bomb
drop, where does that country
stand?
Then: As Easter approaches, we
go to Seville,
Spain, where the decline of
cloistered life
is on full display in the city's
crumbling
convents.
JEFFREY BROWN: Convents like
Santa Ines here
in Seville are hidden treasures
from an earlier
era, once small, but bustling
communities
now with fewer inhabitants and
walls that
are decaying.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And it's Friday.
Mark Shields and David Brooks
are here to
analyze the week's news.
All that and more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: North Korea
issued a new warning
today to the United States.
It came amid signs the North
might be getting
ready for another nuclear test.
The vice foreign minister
charged that the
Trump administration is -- quote
-- "more
vicious and more aggressive"
than President
Obama's.
HAN SONG RYOL, North Korean Vice
Foreign Minister
(through translator): We are
taking into account
the most aggressive and
dangerous option that
the U.S. might come up with, and
we have also
got our options, our
countermeasures ready
in our hands, which means we
will go to war
if they choose.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There's rising
speculation
that Pyongyang could carry out a
nuclear or
a missile test tomorrow.
That's when the North marks the
105th anniversary
of the birth of Kim Il-Sung, who
founded the
hard-line communist state in
1948.
Russia, Syria and Iran say they
have sent
a -- quote -- "strong message"
to the U.S.
not to attack Syria again.
Their foreign ministers met in
Moscow today.
They warned that another U.S.
military strike
could have grave consequences
for regional
and global security.
President Trump ordered a cruise
missile barrage
in Syria last week, after
accusing its government
of a poison gas attack.
In Turkey, voters headed toward
a momentous
decision: whether to approve
greatly expanded
powers for President Recep
Tayyip Erdogan.
Sunday's referendum has sharply
divided the
country, and European election
observers say
the government has tried to
intimidate the
opposition.
Erdogan lashed out at them
today.
RECEP TAYYIP ERDOGAN, Turkish
President (through
translator): Now they say, if
the result is
yes, that means there are a lot
of problems.
Who are you?
First of all, you should know
your place.
This is not your duty.
You can't talk about what will
happen if the
result is yes or no.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Erdogan has
carried out a sweeping
crackdown since an attempted
coup last year.
Back in this country, death
penalty opponents
rallied in Little Rock,
Arkansas, against
plans to execute seven death row
inmates by
the end of the month.
The protest featured celebrity
speakers and
hundreds of others.
The first execution is scheduled
for Monday
night.
Arkansas has not put anyone to
death since
2005, but officials say the
state's supply
of a lethal injection drug is
about to pass
its expiration date.
A federal judge in San Francisco
is being
asked to block President Trump's
executive
order on so-called sanctuary
cities.
It withholds federal funding
from cities that
won't cooperate on deporting
undocumented
immigrants.
San Francisco and Santa Clara
counties argued
today for a nationwide
injunction against
enforcing the funding ban.
The Trump White House says that
it will not
release logs of its visitors.
Today's announcement was a break
from President
Obama's practice, but Trump
administration
officials say that it is in line
with what
previous presidents did.
They cited privacy and national
security concerns.
And Christians around the world
marked this
Good Friday with solemn
observances.
Pope Francis presided at the
traditional Way
of the Cross procession in Rome,
with thousands
in attendance.
And in this country, hundreds of
people walked
the Brooklyn Bridge in New York
behind a man
carrying a cross.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
what a massive
bombing says about the U.S. role
in Afghanistan;
decades of sexual abuse
uncovered at a prestigious
private boarding school;
preserving convents
in Southern Spain; and much
more.
The United States' involvement
in Afghanistan
was brought into stark relief
yesterday with
a massive airstrike in the
country's east.
After nearly 16 years, thousands
of casualties
and billions of dollars, where
does the American
effort stand?
And is the country any closer to
being stabilized?
William Brangham begins our
coverage.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The video
shows a remote
mountain valley suddenly
consumed by a blast
equal to 11 tons of TNT.
The weapon, called a Massive
Ordnance Air
Burst, or MOAB, was used for the
first time
on the battlefield yesterday in
this strike
against Islamic State forces.
GEN.
JOHN NICHOLSON, Commander U.S.
Forces, Afghanistan:
This was the right weapon
against this target.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: In Kabul
today, the top
American commander in
Afghanistan, Army General
John Nicholson, called its use a
tactical
decision, not a strategic change
in policy.
GEN.
JOHN NICHOLSON: The enemy had
created bunkers,
tunnels and extensive mine
fields, and this
weapon was used to reduce those
obstacles,
so we can continue our
offensive.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The target
area was a district
in Nangarhar province, where
last weekend
a U.S. special forces soldier
was killed.
It, along with neighboring Logar
and Kunar
provinces, are rife with Islamic
State activity.
At the same time, the Taliban
also continues
to control and contest broad
swathes of the
Afghan countryside.
The Taliban and ISIS have
claimed responsibility
for a series of recent attacks
in Kabul that
have shaken the capital.
Afghan officials say Thursday's
blast killed
36 Islamic State militants, but
no civilians.
ISIS denied anyone was killed.
Afghan citizens appeared divided
on using
the bomb against ISIS, or
Da'esh, as it's
also known.
MAN (through translator): We are
very happy,
and these kinds of bombs should
be used in
future as well, so ISIS is
rooted out from
here.
MOHAMMED AMAN, Kabul Resident
(through translator):
Da'esh is the enemy of
Afghanistan.
But there are children there,
and they had
casualties from this bombing.
The whole world condemns this
action.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The U.S. still
has nearly
9,000 troops in Afghanistan, and
General Nicholson
has said the NATO force there
needs a few
thousand more troops to train
and advise Afghan
forces.
It's those local forces who
continue to take
major casualties in the fight
against the
insurgents.
That ongoing fight will surely
be on the agenda
when President Trump's national
security adviser,
H.R. McMaster, visits Kabul in
the weeks ahead.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
William Brangham.
JUDY WOODRUFF: For more on all
of this, we
turn to Pamela Constable.
She's the Washington Post bureau
chief in
Kabul and Islamabad.
We're watching -- catching her,
that is, on
one of her trips home.
Pam, we're glad that you're here
to talk about
the developments of the last few
days, but
also to take a look at the
bigger picture
in Afghanistan.
First of all, Kabul, capital
city, how stable
is it?
What does it feel like?
PAMELA CONSTABLE, The Washington
Post: Well,
you know, it's a contradiction.
It's a very busy, active city.
If you walked around it in the
middle of the
day, you would think you were in
the middle
of any other big, poor, but busy
city.
But there's a great feeling of
uncertainty
and tension at this time.
There's been a series of very
bad suicide
bombings, most recently the one
at the military
hospital last month, which was
extremely shocking,
I think, to Kabul residents, who
had gotten
used to a certain sense of
stability and security.
And I think a lot of that is
gone now.
It's also a city that really
shows the difficulties
Afghanistan's having
economically.
The streets are full of beggars,
full of drug
addicts, full of people who are
really struggling
and looking for jobs, so it's a
bit of a sad
picture.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you
attribute it to?
PAMELA CONSTABLE: Oh, that's a
big question.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's a big
question.
PAMELA CONSTABLE: Many things.
I think first and foremost has
to be security.
I mean, you have got a very
persistent, very
sophisticated Taliban
insurgency, which is
really doing lots and lots of
attacks across
the country, as well in the
capital.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And getting
stronger.
PAMELA CONSTABLE: Well,
certainly holding
its own, certainly able to carry
out very
frightening and persistent
attacks, certainly
not close to winning, but
they're certainly
doing pretty well.
Then you have ISIS, which is
known there as
Da'esh, which is a whole other
can of worms,
as they say, a very different
sort of enemy,
more ruthless, less interested
in winning
hearts and minds, more
foreign-based, more
extreme compared to the Taliban,
and, obviously,
of greater concern to the
neighbors.
Russia, for example, is very
concerned about
ISIS, and less so about the
Taliban, which
they appear to be reaching out
to in many
ways.
So, that's number one.
And then following that is a
long list.
There's corruption, there's
poverty, there
is tribal and regional problems,
and there's
the persistent divisions within
the government
itself.
So, people are quite frustrated,
and I think
very disillusioned by the lack
of progress
on a lot of fronts.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Where do -- many
people place
the blame there.
I mean, do they blame the U.S.
for not keeping
more troops on the ground?
Do they blame the Afghan
government?
PAMELA CONSTABLE: I mean,
there's a tendency
to always blame the guy in
charge.
And, of course, that's President
Ghani.
And he deserves some of the
blame.
I think he probably took on more
than he could
chew.
I think he aimed very, very
high.
I think he created unrealistic
expectations
of what was possible, given all
the obstacles.
I think he's made a good-faith
effort.
I think he's done a lot, but
he's also been
really bombarded by so many
problems, corruption
being a major one,
administrative lack of
capacity, and these terrible
struggles that
have gone on within the
government, because,
as you know, it wasn't an
elected government,
per se.
It was sort of a forged or
forced power-sharing
government.
And it's never really gone that
well.
And I think that has really
hampered them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, today, The
Washington
Post, one of your colleagues,
has a piece
today about the growing
involvement -- you
mentioned it a moment ago -- of
Russia and
Iran.
PAMELA CONSTABLE: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How is all that
affecting the
stability there?
PAMELA CONSTABLE: The interest
of Iran is
an old one.
Iran is a neighbor with lots of
trade and
traffic back and forth.
It's obviously Shiite.
There are many, many, many
Shiite Muslims
in Afghanistan.
So, it's a neighbor, but it's
always been
a neighbor that had lots of
political interest
in having influence of all
kinds.
That's not new.
What's relatively new is Russia,
which obviously
is a much more powerful country,
not a neighbor,
but close enough, that's showing
every sign
of wanting to get involved, for
the first
time since the '80s, when,
obviously, they
backed the government there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, you now have,
as William
reported, the U.S. commander
reportedly asking
for -- reportedly asking for
thousands more
U.S. troops to go in there.
Is there a sense that that could
make a difference?
PAMELA CONSTABLE: I don't know
the answer
to that.
I think it certainly would make
an important
psychological difference.
You asked a minute ago about
what Afghans
want.
They are very ambivalent.
The Afghan administration, both
military and
civilian, very much want more
American military
support.
Particularly, what they want is
air combat
support, not necessarily ground
troops.
They say that, if they had
better combat air
support from NATO, from the
U.S., they could
handle things on the ground.
But, anyway, they certainly want
more help.
The Afghan people are rather
ambivalent.
There's been -- there's a real
sort of leftover
bitterness and resentment and
sort of complicated
legacy of the Western
involvement there militarily.
So, the jury is still out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And after 16
years, it doesn't
get any simpler.
PAMELA CONSTABLE: No, it
doesn't.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pam Constable of
The Washington
Post, thank you very much.
PAMELA CONSTABLE: Very glad to
be here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now an
investigation that uncovered
decades of sexual abuse at one
of the nation's
elite private preparatory
schools, and the
extent to which the school
hushed it up.
Hari Sreenivasan has that story
from our New
York studios.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The report
released last
night focused on a dozen former
teachers at
the prestigious boarding school
in Connecticut,
Choate Rosemary Hall.
It recounts the experiences of
24 adult alumni
who were allegedly abused
between 1963 and
2010.
Investigators said the offenses
ranged from
kissing to groping to rape.
Choate hired a law firm with no
previous ties
to the school to lead the
investigation.
Jonathan Saltzman was part of
The Boston Globe
Spotlight team that helped break
the story.
And Paul Mones is an attorney
who has represented
sexual abuse survivors at
private schools
and other institutions.
He is not involved in any of the
Choate cases.
Jonathan, I want to start with
you.
You and your team launched this
series a while
back about this happening at
elite prep schools
in the Northeast.
What did this report reveal to
you?
JONATHAN SALTZMAN, The Boston
Globe: Well,
we had reported on about 110
private schools
in New England that had faced
allegations
of sexual abuse over the past 25
years.
And we mentioned Choate.
But this report was initiated in
response
to that story, and it laid out
in extremely
graphic detail the accounts of
about 24 survivors
of abuse.
And as you said in your
introduction, some
of these are extraordinarily
graphic descriptions
of abuse, rape.
And, to me, the most startling
thing about
the report was that, first, the
school named
12 teachers that they said had
abused kids.
That's an extraordinary number,
and we haven't
seen that before in other
schools.
And then what they also did was
they essentially
owned up to the fact that they
had never reported
these cases of abuse to child
welfare authorities
in Connecticut, even though it
had been required.
HARI SREENIVASAN: There is an
incident that
was mentioned in the report of
what would
likely qualify of at least
attempted rape
that happened in a swimming pool
on a field
trip in Costa Rica.
But the headmaster to the board
of trustees
essentially labeled it --
pointed to heavy
drinking and inappropriate
behavior.
And then we find out that the
teacher in question
was still employed as a
principal at a different
school until last week.
JONATHAN SALTZMAN: That's right.
Choate got in touch with that
public school
in Litchfield, Connecticut, very
recently.
And I spoke to a lawyer for that
school district
in Litchfield last night.
And they said that they had --
that when this
teacher applied, he used a
slight variation
of his name, and that he never
mentioned that
he'd worked at Choate.
And that's a running theme that
we found in
a number of our stories, this
whole passing
the trash syndrome, which is
that schools
let teachers go quietly, they
hush it up,
and the teachers resurface
somewhere else.
PAUL MONES, Sexual Abuse
Attorney: What I
found particularly, if I could
just comment
quickly on it, particularly
interesting is
that the school only acted, only
acted after
the Boston Globe story.
They would have been comfortable
sitting on
their hands if The Boston Globe
didn't call.
This is typical of the behavior
of large institutions
wherein sexual abuse happens
among their ranks.
And so they follow the same
pattern as the
Catholic Church.
There is one interesting part of
the report,
in fact, where, in the summer of
2012 -- 2002
-- I'm sorry -- it was reported
that they
received reports a teacher had
molested a
student.
They called that teacher back to
the school
and basically let this teacher
quietly leave,
in fact, even say -- and I'm
sure you remember
this -- where the teacher would
then get a
recommendation to go work at a
boys school.
You have to remember that the
Boston Globe
stories on the Catholic Church,
where this
identical behavior was
happening, was -- started
the criminal -- the review of
the criminal
cases in January or February of
2002.
And so it's not like this
happened many years
ago.
Sometimes, we say, oh, in the
Boy Scout cases
I have had or the church cases,
oh, it was
the '60s or the '70s.
These are, like, super smart
people in an
elite institution, and you only
have to -- you
have to believe they never read
The New York
Times or The Boston Globe or
listened to the
TV or had any knowledge
whatsoever of sexual
abuse to act in such an
opprobrious way to
the welfare of the children even
as late as
2002.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Paul, you have
taken on
-- your clients have taken on a
lot of different
types of institutions.
And you have described child
abuse as almost
a perfect crime.
Explain.
PAUL MONES: Right.
It's a perfect crime because the
victims remain
silent.
The perpetrators -- we
underestimate the perpetrators,
because these are very smart
people.
In the cases of private schools,
we know that
private schools survive or they
are best known
for congeniality, conviviality,
informal relationships,
calling the teachers by their
first name,
coming over to the teacher's
house for studying,
maybe for a glass of wine, you
know, when
the kid is 16 -- 15 or 16 years
old.
And so it's this breeding
ground.
But these people are very --
perpetrators
are very smart, and they know
how to take
advantage of a place that
doesn't have many
boundaries.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Jon Saltzman,
we asked Choate
if they would appear, and they
said they would
not.
But they did send us a
statement.
It says: "We profoundly
apologize.
The conduct of these adults
violated the foundation
of our community, the sacred
trust between
students and the adults charged
with their
care.
We honor and thank the survivors
of sexual
misconduct who came forward."
That is part of their statement.
Considering that this report
only goes until
2010, what's happening now at
the school?
And how are they trying to
prevent this from
happening again in the future?
JONATHAN SALTZMAN: Well, it's a
good question.
The school says that they are --
they have
heightened awareness about this,
that in one
of the cases they reported --
there was one
case that they reported to child
welfare authorities.
And this was around in 2010.
They discuss greater training,
things like
that.
And I should point out that some
other attorneys
that I spoke to who said --
agree with Paul
that this is a litany of
horribles, did give
the school credit for being as
frank as they
were in this report.
I spoke also to one of the
alumni, and -- who
is the only one identified as
being abused,
because she came forward to us,
and she gave
them credit for being as frank
as they were.
And I will give you an example
of how frank
they are.
This report -- I have never seen
this in another
report from a school -- has a
label on the
top of it saying that it
contains graphic
material and is not suitable
reading for children.
That's a pretty telling thing to
put on a
report.
PAUL MONES: Right.
And I read that and I thought,
really?
You know, it was good enough to
sweep under
the rug.
And I understand that, but I
thought -- I
was turned of by that.
I thought that, yes, it was that
graphic,
but now they're saying you have
to have -- you
know, keep it away from unwanted
eyes.
I viewed this as being a -- the
only reason,
as I said -- I will have to
reiterate this
-- if The Globe didn't come
knocking, if there
wasn't a rising march of voices
of students
from private schools yelling for
relief, Horace
Mann School, St. George's School
around the
country, they would have done
nothing at all.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
gentlemen, we
will see you on TV tonight.
Thank you very much.
PAUL MONES: OK.
Thanks a lot.
JONATHAN SALTZMAN: Thanks, Hari.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
Mark Shields
and David Brooks analyze the
week's news;
basketball great Oscar Robertson
on the man
who broke his triple-double
record that has
stood since 1962; and making the
case for
expertise.
But first: Today is Good Friday,
when Christians
around the world commemorate the
crucifixion
of Jesus Christ, ahead of Easter
Sunday.
One of the largest public
displays occurs
each year in Seville, Spain, but
declining
faith among the Spanish people
is threatening
a longtime pillar of the
Catholic Church,
its cloistered convents.
Jeffrey Brown has that story.
It's part of our continuing
series Culture
at Risk.
JEFFREY BROWN: Everywhere you
turn in Seville,
tradition and history, reminders
of a rich
religious past.
But rarely seen, Seville's
cloistered convents,
cities within cities behind high
walls, a
piece of the fabric of the
community, yet
separate and apart, places like
the convent
of Santa Ines, founded in 1372
by Maria Coronel,
whose body still lies in repose
in the church's
chapel.
Prioress Maria Rebecca Cervantes
Cisneros
joined the sisterhood when she
was just 13
years old.
MARIA REBECCA CERVANTES
CISNEROS, Prioress
(through translator): Many
people might say
that a person doesn't know what
she's doing
at that age, but I think that it
is a gift
from God, and that he is free to
call for
you whenever he wishes.
And, to this day, I do not
regret having heeded
that call.
JEFFREY BROWN: Yet, in Spain
today, few women
heed that call.
Only about 15 percent of the
population even
attends mass.
Twenty-five years ago, there
were 41 cloistered
convents in Seville, the highest
concentration
in Spain.
Today, just 15 active ones
remain, and at
Santa Ines, eight nuns,
practicing what's
known as their vocation, watch
over this entire
complex.
Six of them come not from Spain,
but from
Mexico, including the prioress.
MARIA REBECCA CERVANTES
CISNEROS: Here in
Europe, there's a very general
crisis of vocations.
Perhaps there's also a lack of
knowledge.
Maybe we need to promote
ourselves more, because
people aren't very familiar with
us.
Many people think that the life
of a contemplative
is like a useless life.
JEFFREY BROWN: Convents like
Santa Ines here
in Seville are hidden treasures
from an earlier
era, once small, but bustling
communities,
now fewer inhabitants now, and
walls that
are decaying.
The murals lining the courtyard,
which illustrate
biblical stories and are said to
date to the
1400s, are cracking and flaking
away.
So, too, are many of its Spanish
tiles.
Some are held in place by
fabric.
The structural beams supporting
the entrance
to the outside world, through
which everyday
citizens enter daily to buy
sweets through
the turnstile, are cracked, in
danger of collapsing.
Weeds grow out of every nook.
PABLO LONGORIA, World Monuments
Fund: This
is one of the two, three
convents that is
in worst shape.
JEFFREY BROWN: Pablo Longoria
directs projects
in Spain for the world monuments
fund, which
last year added Seville's
convents to its
endangered heritage watch list.
With his help, we were given
rare access during
the season of Lent.
Even still, many of the nuns
preferred to
remain away from our cameras.
PABLO LONGORIA: Convents are
very old buildings
that were usually kept by the
donation of
citizens, religious people that
would give
the convents money and products,
and by the
nuns.
So, 50 years ago, you would have
80 nuns in
this convent.
Now you have eight left.
JEFFREY BROWN: With much less
support.
PABLO LONGORIA: With much less
support and
with many more years.
The average age must be 75 to 80
years.
JEFFREY BROWN: While Santa Ines
has imported
its nuns from Mexico, at Santa
Paula, another
convent less than a mile away,
most of the
20 nuns are from India.
Santa Paula was established in
1473 by the
Order of Saint Jerome and,
thanks to the largess
of the noble family of a former
prioress,
is in better shape.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which is your
favorite?
WOMAN: This.
JEFFREY BROWN: This one?
The nuns here sell their sweets
from a shop,
and even have a small museum
often open to
the public.
But with only about a third of
its former
population, the problem of
maintaining this
huge place remains.
This massive church portal,
designed by Italian
sculptor Nicola Pisano and
dating to 1504,
combines Gothic, Moorish and
Renaissance styles,
but it's been slowly destroyed
by water damage,
spiders nests, an overall lack
of care.
MARTA VILLANUEVA, Architect
(through translator):
It's more dark here.
That's because of the water.
JEFFREY BROWN: Marta Villanueva
has been coming
here since she was a little
girl, and followed
her father into the field of
architectural
restoration.
She's now working on a two-year
project to
restore this portal, funded by a
$200,000
grant from the U.S.-based
Annenberg Foundation.
MARTA VILLANUEVA (through
translator): This
facade is absolutely one of a
kind.
There are no others like it in
all of Spain.
The most unique aspect is the
capacity it
has to unite different currents,
both aesthetically
and in thought.
It's a synthesis of the culture
that was enriching
all of Seville.
JEFFREY BROWN: But, she says,
the needs of
this convent and others far
outstrip the means
of the nuns' orders, which own
them.
MARTA VILLANUEVA (through
translator): This
type of monument needs continual
maintenance,
and that requires means to see
them through.
The resources aren't always
there.
JEFFREY BROWN: The World
Monuments Fund is
attempting to bring stakeholders
together
in Seville, the religious
orders, the surrounding
communities and the regional
government, to
catalogue the damage and
prioritize the greatest
needs.
PABLO LONGORIA: The best case
scenario is,
we find, through careful study
of the building,
a way to make it sustainable
through time,
a way in which the nuns can
stay, they can
keep their traditions.
JEFFREY BROWN: Many convents
have been lost
already, abandoned or converted
into offices
for the municipal government,
museums or event
spaces.
JAVIER RODRIGUEZ BARBERAN,
University of Seville:
You feel here like if you work
in a part of
the convent.
JEFFREY BROWN: Javier Rodriguez
Barberan is
a professor of art history at
the University
of Seville and, like many here,
grew up around
the convents.
JAVIER RODRIGUEZ BARBERAN:
Imagine there are
no nuns inside the convent.
You can see beautiful building,
you can see
beautiful works of art, but it's
no more a
convent.
It would be a museum.
It would be a hotel.
It would be a restaurant, I
don't know, but
no more a convent.
JEFFREY BROWN: Which would mean
the life of
the place is gone.
JAVIER RODRIGUEZ BARBERAN:
Exactly.
JEFFREY BROWN: At Santa Ines,
Prioress Cervantes
is asking the regional
government to make
good on a decades-old pledge to
help restore
her convent.
She hopes they won't have to
close this sanctuary,
but is at peace in any case.
MARIA REBECCA CERVANTES CISNEROS
(through
translator): Even though we are
concerned
about the shortage of vocations
and such,
I think you simply forget the
present, leave
it aside and give your life and
devotion to
the vocation we have received as
a gift, and
the rest is up to God.
JEFFREY BROWN: For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown in Seville, Spain.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we turn to
politics, starting
with the backlash some GOP
lawmakers are facing
in their home districts this
week.
WOMAN: Answer it!
MAN: Answer it!
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's the second
major congressional
recess of the year, and
Republicans are again
facing tense encounters with
their constituents.
Take last night's raucous town
hall in Mesa,
Arizona.
AUDIENCE: Shame on you!
Shame on you!
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republican
Senator Jeff Flake
was booed lustily during an
exchange on health
care.
WOMAN: Mr. Flake, why is it
that, in Germany,
we have had a universal health
care system
since...
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
WOMAN: Wait a minute.
Since 1871?
SEN.
JEFF FLAKE (R), Arizona: Well,
thank you for
that.
I just -- I don't happen to
agree.
I think the free market
system...
(BOOING)
JUDY WOODRUFF: And in South
Carolina on Monday.
REP.
JOE WILSON (R), South Carolina:
Obamacare
is denying services, delaying
services.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Representative
Joe Wilson heard
it from voters who parroted the
charge he
once hurled at President Obama.
AUDIENCE: You lie!
You lie!
JUDY WOODRUFF: Wednesday night,
Colorado constituents
demanded that Representative
Mike Coffman
break with President Trump.
WOMAN: I would like to know when
you are going
to stop voting with the
president who has
a 35 percent approval rating,
and start fighting
for Coloradans?
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
REP.
MIKE COFFMAN (R), Colorado: When
I disagree
with the president, I will speak
out with
the president.
But I'm not going to do it every
other day.
It's when it's something
significant.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Attendees at that
event had
to show an I.D., and limit signs
to notebook
size.
Other Republicans have opted
against holding
mass voter events at all.
Instead, some are conducting
tele-town halls
over the phone and social media.
A big question is, will the
anger translate
beyond town halls?
This week in Kansas, in a
rock-solid Republican
district, the GOP only narrowly
won a special
election for the House seat
vacated by Mike
Pompeo, who's now director of
the CIA.
There's another closely watched
special House
election next Tuesday in Georgia
to replace
Tom Price, the new secretary of
health and
human services.
And with that, we turn to the
analysis of
Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist Mark
Shields and
New York Times columnist David
Brooks.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Welcome,
gentlemen.
So, David, what do you make of
all this hostility
at some of the town halls?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I think there
are two issues
here.
One is the hostility of the town
hall.
I'm not sure what to make of
that.
I think it means that
progressives are as
enraged as the Tea Party people
were of several
years ago.
The larger issue is the shift in
the polls
in that Kansas race and some of
the other
races and the shift that we see
in the polls
generally.
And that's less -- that's not
only the fact
progressives are more energized,
but it's
also the drifting away of
Republicans from
the Trump administration.
And it's not happening on a
state level, so
this is Trump-related.
And so, if I were a House member
with -- maybe
if I had won my last seat, and I
am Republican,
by 10 or 15 points, I think I
would be more
nervous than ever before in my
career.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What do you
attribute all this
to?
MARK SHIELDS: Well, first of
all, Judy, the
Joe Wilson segment was
particularly appropriate,
South Carolina.
It was September 2009 where Joe
Wilson, I
think, changed American
politics.
He was a member of the House of
Representatives
then, as he is now.
President Barack Obama was
addressing the
Congress on Medicare, joint
session, and the
president said illegal
undocumented immigrants
wouldn't be covered under the
health care
plan.
And Joe Wilson broke all
customs, traditions
and stood up and said, "You lie,
you lie,"
and he was reprimanded
officially by the House
of Representatives.
He had to apologize.
He apologized personally.
He raised $1.5 million the next
week.
And that's when it -- learned
that there wasn't
a consequence to such behavior.
And it sort of, I think, really
raised to
a different level the
polarization and the
personalization of our politics,
that anything
goes as long as you raise money.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It was kind of a
turning point.
MARK SHIELDS: I really feel that
way.
So, I agree with David.
I think there is energy, there's
no question,
and passion, just as there was
then against
President Obama in 2009, 2010.
There isn't any trace of any
racial component
to the opposition to President
Trump, but
there is passion.
And I think that's what you see.
What I would be worried about,
Democrats should
be, that this looks
orchestrated, that it
looks planned, that the
Democratic National
Committee sent out a message
saying, get in
Jeff Flake's grill, so that it's
not just
a question of spontaneity, of
people expressing
their own opposition or
criticism about policies,
but, instead, sort of
organizing.
If it starts to ring of an
organized effort,
I think it hurts.
As far as the special House
elections, they're
always aberrational, but if the
Democrats
are going to win the House in
2018, they have
to win districts like the one in
Georgia,
which...
JUDY WOODRUFF: The one that is
up next Tuesday.
MARK SHIELDS: ... Mitt Romney
won by 20 points
and Donald Trump only won by
two.
It's twice as college-educated a
population,
electorate as the reset of the
state.
And this is the kind of place
they have to
break through.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What determines,
David, whether
Democrats stay energized or not?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, we have
learned that hatred
is the organizing -- the great
organizing
principle in politics.
And, of course, they have done
so poorly in
the midterms because their
output, their turnout
tends to be low in those races.
You know, to me, it's very
hazardous to linearly
project out.
We have seen in the last week
the Trump administration
shift in a radical way.
And so something really bad
could happen,
something really good could
happen, but the
odds that the future a year from
now will
look like the present, those
strike me as
infinitesimally low.
We're in a position there is
just wide variance
on what could happen.
And so I'm not sure it makes
much sense to
think, what is 2018 going to
look like, because
there are probably -- as many
days as there
are between now and then, that's
how many
changes of directions we're
probably going
to see.
MARK SHIELDS: One quick measure
of prospects
is the ability to translate that
enthusiasm
into contributions.
And the Democratic candidate in
Georgia, Jon
Ossoff, who is really untried,
untested, I
mean, a young man, 30 years old,
with a very
thin resume, has raised over
$8.5 million.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Much of it from
out of state.
MARK SHIELDS: Most of it
overwhelmingly from
out of state.
When the Democrats did last
capture the House
from the Republicans in 2006,
one of the reasons
they did is that the Democrats,
under Rahm
Emanuel's leadership, now the
mayor of Chicago,
devoted incredible effort to
recruiting candidates
who fit with the districts in
which they ran.
That's when they ran Blue Dog
Democrats, conservative
to moderate Democrats in
conservative to moderate
areas.
Since then, they have kind of
turned over
the nominating process to
national liberal
groups and whomever they
support.
And I think that's been a
mistake and I think
they have paid for it at the
polls.
DAVID BROOKS: If I could make
one quick comment
about the town halls, I probably
wouldn't
go to them.
Like, I love political
discussion.
But having people shout at each
other, even
if you agree, it's just -- I
think it's bad
in general.
Whether you agree with them or
not, it's just
not a conversation.
It's just umbrage and it's a
little bit theatrical.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But they used to
be very quiet,
didn't they?
This is a big change.
But, David, you mentioned a
minute ago something
that I do want to ask you both
about.
And that is what appears to be a
change in
position by the president on a
number of things,
around trade, around NAFTA, that
he's going
to declare China a currency
manipulator on
day one, that he's going to get
health care
passed.
And that's a different issue,
that you have
to have Congress go along.
DAVID BROOKS: Janet Yellen at
the...
JUDY WOODRUFF: Janet Yellen, the
chairman
of the Federal Reserve.
DAVID BROOKS: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What's going on
here?
Are these genuine changes of
opinion?
What -- how do you see it?
DAVID BROOKS: Certainly struck
by it.
There are a lot of data points
all of a sudden.
And most people, if they --
especially if
you're an academic or an writer,
if you spend
many months arguing that China's
a manipulator,
a currency manipulator, you
don't just then
turn on a dime.
But Donald Trump is different.
He's a marketing guy.
He's a business guy, whatever is
working for
him at the moment.
And it seems, from this many
data points,
he's making the conclusion that
the populism
and the Bannon-ism is not
working, and he's
going to go to something else.
Now, what exactly that else
thing is, we don't
really know.
It could be sort of a
corporatism.
It could be, let me trust my
business guys,
let's go to the CEOs, and let's
-- those guys,
I can trust.
There seems to be some
instinctual sense that
he's shifting teams of who he
wants to be
his key advisers.
And with Trump, because he knows
so little,
it's not him personal initiating
policy.
The crucial question is, who is
he listening
to?
And there's a clear shift, at
least in one
week, that there has been a
radical shift
in his advisee team.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But it is a
remarkable number
of issues that the president
appears, Mark,
to be taking the opposite stand
from what
he said during the campaign.
MARK SHIELDS: No, you're right,
Judy.
Even during the campaign, when
he said things
that were inconsistent or
occasionally contradictory,
the defense, the rebuttal of
this on the part
of his supporters was, hey, he
may not always
be -- but he says what he means,
and he means
what he says, and the guy just
doesn't say
it all of the time with polish,
but he says
it with conviction.
Well, his convictions turned out
to have the
shelf life of a used kleenex.
They just disappear.
So, you know, now he's moved
toward orthodoxy,
sort of a Republican orthodoxy,
business -- pro-business
orthodoxy, international
responsibility, America
is the -- if not the policeman
of the world,
then certainly a projector of
force and influence
in maintaining security around
the world.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I mean, just in
the last week,
the bomb that was dropped in
Afghanistan,
the strike in Syria, right.
MARK SHIELDS: The bomb in
Afghanistan.
But in both Afghanistan and
Syria, there wasn't
any consequence of -- real
likely consequence
of any national retaliation to
the United
States.
They were enormous acts.
I mean, they got the world's
attention.
North Korea is different.
And tough talk in North Korea is
not going
to stop Kim Jong-un from -- I
don't think,
from a nuclear test.
And I think the consequences in
North Korea
and our dealing with North Korea
really are
enormously consequential and
very, very serious,
and should be of concern to
everybody involved.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But, David, the
president,
it seems to me, has been pretty
loose with
the tweets.
He's been saying, if China
doesn't help us
get North Korea in line, we will
go it alone,
we will do it ourselves.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
One is always unnerved.
The North Korea situation is
unnerving.
But I have to say, I think the
president has
had a good week on the subject.
The shift in China, the harsher
tone from
China toward North Korea, the,
in effect,
drawing a red line against North
Korea and
also against us, that's a win.
That's a very significant
development, that
China is clearly upset, clearly
concerned
about what's going on, and
they're willing
to step into North Korea and
say, don't cross
that line.
And so that is a significant
shift.
And one has to give some credit
to Donald
Trump.
And two things have happened.
One is the Syria thing happened,
and the sense
that the U.S. is sort of active
again in the
world, which it hasn't been for
many years.
And, second -- and I made this
point last
week, and Mark didn't respond
favorably to
it -- which is, there is some
advantages and
disadvantages to having an
unpredictable guy
as president.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID BROOKS: Disadvantages if
you're an ally,
but some advantages toward the
enemy, because
they don't know what's
happening.
And I do think the more
assertive U.S. has
had some role in this and
progress on the
North Korea thing.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A week later,
where are you?
MARK SHIELDS: A week later, I
accept David's
apology.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: No.
I mean, Judy, I mean,
unpredictability is
not the defining -- shouldn't be
the defining
characteristic of a presidency.
I mean, the ability to take new
information
and to change direction, you
know, yes, and
change policy, is there any
indication that
there is any thought been given
to this policy?
I mean, the great consolation
that people
in Washington take, whether they
should or
they shouldn't, is James Mattis,
General McMaster,
you know, that these are people
of seriousness,
Rex Tillerson, people of
stability and consequence.
They don't have anything
comparable at the
home -- on the domestic side.
And, you know, that's it.
I just don't think you can have
somebody do
it on whim and by tweet.
And I really -- David's far more
sanguine
about North Korea and China
right now than
I am.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, I'm not
saying sanguine.
I'm saying progress.
But I do think this emphasizes a
point, is
that we could be moving toward
an administration
where Trump is less dominant and
less influenced
by Bannon, who I think was a
very bad influence,
and you get a team of advisers
who are building
a structure around him, and the
McMasters
and Gary Cohns and maybe the
Jared Kushners.
And so we could be going into
something that
looks a little more like Cabinet
government
than we have seen in a while,
where Gary Cohn
does what he wants on economic
policy, Jeff
Sessions continues to do what he
wants in
a more populist on immigration
policy, and
we're looking to the second tier
to actually
making more decisions, and maybe
the top guy
is just out doing his tweets.
MARK SHIELDS: Gary Cohn better
be careful.
He better not be on a "Saturday
Night Live"
skit featured as the dominant
figure in the
White House.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Referring back to
Steve Bannon.
MARK SHIELDS: He better not be
on the cover
of "TIME" magazine.
That, in itself, I think -- I
mean, Donald
Trump, whatever else he is, we
know, is sensitive
to, aware and keenly interested
in publicity
and who gets attention.
And I have to think that Steve
Bannon's star
wasn't elevated or helped by the
kind of attention
he got in the press.
JUDY WOODRUFF: "Saturday Night
Live" is -- an
unforgettable image of him as
the -- death,
not just the Grim Reaper, but
death.
MARK SHIELDS: Right.
That's right, and the dominant
figure with
his puppet.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Shields,
David Brooks,
thank you both.
The NBA playoffs games begin
this weekend,
and they come as one of the
game's superstars
just broke a historic record
this week.
John Yang has
the story.
JOHN YANG: Oklahoma City Thunder
point guard
Russell Westbrook did something
this season
no player has done in 55 years.
He averaged double digits in
points, assists
and rebounds, a triple-double.
The last NBA Player to do that?
Oscar Robertson with the old
Cincinnati Royals
in the 1961-'62 season.
What's more, Westbrook was the
league's leading
scorer this year, averaging 31
points a game,
including this game winner.
OSCAR ROBERTSON, Former NBA
Player: When Russell
was on this journey, I felt that
I just had
to be here.
JOHN YANG: Robertson, a Hall of
Fame point
guard who was a 12-time All-Star
and league
MVP, honored Westbrook before
the Thunder's
final regular season game.
And joining us from Cincinnati
now is Oscar
Robertson, who, by the way, was
the first
African-American president of a
pro sports
labor union and brought the
lawsuit that led
to free agency in the NBA.
Mr. Robertson, thanks so much
for joining
us.
Help us understand this
accomplishment.
Put it into context.
How difficult is it to achieve a
triple-double,
and why did it take so long for
someone to
match your accomplishment in the
'61-'62 season?
OSCAR ROBERTSON: Well, I don't
know, because
I guess they weren't counting
that much about
triple-doubles to begin with.
But I do believe -- and I have
said this to
many of my friends who are
basketball players
-- when Kevin Durant left
Oklahoma, it opened
the door for Russell Westbrook.
And he came through it with a
lot of vigor,
and look what he's done with it.
He had to attack.
They had a team.
They probably didn't think the
team would
be worthy enough because Kevin
Durant left.
But Russell Westbrook stepped up
to the plate
and delivered.
JOHN YANG: But to do this, to
get the triple-double,
you have got to be an all-around
player.
You have got to have the power
drive to score.
You have got to have the hustle
to rebound
and the sort of playmaking for
the assists.
So, is that why this is such a
rare accomplishment?
OSCAR ROBERTSON: No, I think the
rarity of
it is that the assists are going
to be there
and the scoring, of course,
because he's a
tremendous basketball, offensive
basketball
player.
The real key is, can you get the
rebounds?
And I was speaking to him the
other, and he
agreed, said that was the
toughest thing to
get is the rebounds sometimes.
And you get with a certain team.
And now, in this electronic age,
and you have
to be able to go inside to help
your big people
rebound, if you don't have a
dominated rebounding
team, like -- and I don't think
Oklahoma State
has got much of a rebounding
team compared
to some of the other teams in
the league.
JOHN YANG: How did you feel
about Westbrook
breaking your record for the
number of double-triples
in a season and also matching --
having double-triples
for -- averaging double-triples
for the full
season?
OSCAR ROBERTSON: Well, I thought
about it,
and I just said I felt happy.
I felt very happy for Russell,
because it
was a tremendous treat, historic
in nature,
because -- you know, it's just a
funny thing
that, when I did these things in
the '60s,
no one even knew anything --
knew what a triple-double
was.
But Russell -- this is a new age
now in basketball.
People are -- you're seeing,
this year, they
drew more fans than they have in
the history
of basketball.
And Russell Westbrook has
stepped up to the
plate.
When he's on the court, man,
everybody wants
to see him play.
And this is really something.
And I think, as people think
about it a little
bit, they are going to think
much more than
they do right now.
JOHN YANG: When you were in
Oklahoma City
with Westbrook the other day,
you charted
The chant, "MVP."
Why do you think he should be
MVP this year?
(LAUGHTER)
OSCAR ROBERTSON: Look what he
did.
He broke a record.
It's been there 55 years.
Why shouldn't he be the MVP?
So, I think what he's done has
been marvelous.
As I said before, he took a team
that people
didn't think was going very far,
although
I don't -- some other teams have
gotten more
wins than they have, but, as far
as being
electrifying and drawing fans to
the arena
to see them play, he is the MVP
of the league.
JOHN YANG: And talk about
electrifying the
fans and drawing them in, this
weekend, of
course, the playoff start.
On Sunday, Westbrook will be
facing off against
another top candidate of the
MVP, James Harden
of the Houston Rockets.
What do you think of that
matchup?
OSCAR ROBERTSON: I think this is
what championship
basketball is all about.
You get the play the tough, best
competition.
It's going to be more spirited.
The fouls will be harder.
And the drives will be a little
bit with more
definition to them.
It's going to be difficult for
anybody that
gets through there, because
they're in a difficult
conference with San Antonio,
with the Clippers
and, of course, the Golden State
Warriors.
JOHN YANG: What do you think?
What are you looking for in the
playoffs this
year?
You going to make a prediction
for us?
OSCAR ROBERTSON: Well, I will
just go what
has gone, what has happened so
far.
I think Golden State is the team
to beat.
They have shown that they can --
they have
a team that can adjust to play
against almost
anybody.
And even though Durant's been
out, he's back
now, and so they haven't -- they
didn't miss
a beat when he was out.
So, they're going to move
forward.
And I'm sure they're going to be
the team
to bet on the West Coast.
On the East Coast, it's up in
the air.
There is no real dominant team.
Cleveland looked like they were
dominant for
a while, but they have got some
injuries.
And, as LeBron said, we're not
playing tough
enough.
So, I guess something is going
to happen pretty
soon whereby that may change.
If it doesn't change, they're
not going to
win the championship.
JOHN YANG: We will see starting
this weekend.
Oscar Robertson, thanks so much
for joining
us.
essay
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight,
the latest
installment in our series of
essays.
Tom Nichols, author of the book
"The Death
of Expertise," shares his Humble
Opinion on
the demise of experts.
TOM NICHOLS, Author, "The Death
of Expertise":
A few years ago, a mischievous
group of pollsters
asked American voters whether
they would support
bombing the country of Agrabah.
As you might expect, Republicans
tended to
support military action, while
Democrats were
more reluctant.
There's only one problem:
Agrabah doesn't
exist.
It's from the animated Disney
film "Aladdin."
Only about half the people
surveyed figured
this out, and liberals and
conservatives gleefully
pointed fingers at each other.
For experts in foreign affairs,
however, there
was no way around the alarming
reality that
so many Americans had a
well-defined view
on bombing a cartoon.
I'm one of those experts.
I teach both civilians and
military officers
about national security affairs.
In my career, I have advised the
Pentagon,
the CIA, and political leaders
from both major
parties.
Increasingly, however, laypeople
don't care
about expert views.
Instead, many Americans have
become insufferable
know-it-alls, locked in constant
conflict
with each other, while knowing
almost nothing
about the subject they are
debating.
How did this happen?
How is it that people now not
only doubt expert
advice, but believe themselves
to be as smart,
or even smarter, than
experienced professionals?
Parents who refuse to vaccinate
a child, for
example, aren't really
questioning their doctors.
They're replacing their doctors.
They have decided that attending
the university
of Google, as one anti-vaccine
activist put
it, is the same as going to
medical school.
People who have no idea how much
the United
States spends on foreign aid
think that they're
the peers of experienced
diplomats.
Experts in almost every field
can tell similar
stories.
There's a lot of blame to go
around for all
of this.
The smartphones and tablets that
we carry
around all day that we think can
answer anything
are only part of the problem.
The American educational system,
from grade
school to graduate school,
encourages students
to think of themselves and their
views as
special.
An A is now a common grade.
The news media, while trying to
tell people
what they need to hear, must
compete for ears,
eyes, and clicks, and so are
also forced to
ask them what they'd like to
hear.
And even if we manage to avoid
the intellectual
saboteurs of the Internet, we're
still all
too likely to get our news and
views from
social media, where a silly meme
from your
aunt Rose in Schenectady
competes for your
attention with actual
information.
We need to find our way back
from this ego-driven
wilderness.
Historically, people return to
valuing expert
views in times of trouble or
distress.
We're all willing to argue with
our doctors
until our fever is out of
control.
Let's hope it doesn't come to
that.
But that's where we're headed.
And unless we start accepting
the limitations
of our own knowledge, then each
of us is failing
in our obligation to participate
in our democracy
as involved, but informed
citizens.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can find
more expert
views from our series In My
Humble Opinion.
That's on our Web site.
Also online: Meet a storm chaser
who studies
tornadoes, not with a pickup
truck, but a
supercomputer.
He explains how his simulations
could one
day improve tornado forecasting.
Again, that's at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Later tonight on "Washington
Week": How have
President Trump's foreign policy
priorities
shifted since he took office?
An all-foreign policy roundtable
reports on
the evolving Trump doctrine and
what it signals
to the global community.
And on tomorrow's edition of
"PBS NewsHour
Weekend": a report on why
hundreds of undocumented
immigrants are flocking from the
U.S. to Canada,
crossing the open northern
border on foot.
And we will be back right here
on Monday.
As Tax Day approaches, we will
look at protests
over President Trump's decision
not to release
his tax returns.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
Have a great Easter weekend.
Thank you -- and Passover -- and
good night.